# Beyond GenServer

There are two more OTP compliant workers that have not been talked about yet:

1. Tasks: useful for running one-off jobs
2. Agents: manage state and provide concurrent access to it

In some cases an ETS table can be the better choice between a GenServer and an
Agent.

## Tasks

Tasks differ from GenServers in the sense that Tasks just do a job and terminate
whereas GenServers are a long running process.

Usually they are asynchronous but there is a way to make them synchronous by
using awaited tasks.

### Awaited tasks

An awaited tasks is a process that executes some function, sends the result back
to the caller and then terminates.

In order to do this you can use `Task.async/1` to return a struct that describes
the running process and then use `Task.await/1` to return the value of the
process. There is a default time to wait but it can be changed.

Using this the code will wait for the task to be completed which makes the
result deterministic (the output order will be the same as the order of 
execution).

If there are any failures in the Task happening it will crash all of the process
and return an error. This will happen unless the parent process is trapping
exits.

There is a second way to do this and it by individually handling errors, which
can be done with `Task.async_stream/3`.

### Non awaited tasks

If you don't want to send a result message back to the starter process then you
can just use `Task.start_link/1`, which is fairly similar to an OTP compliant
wrapper over spawn link.

During the example of adding metrics to the to-do server you need to add `use
Task` in order for it to inject its own `child_spec/1` function for the
supervisor to use.

Using task to collect metrics like this demonstrates how easy it is to set up
recurring jobs without the need of cron jobs or another system (shows how BEAM
languages can do everything). It is worth remembering that `Process.sleep/1`
puts the process in a state such that it takes a negligible amount of resources,
very different from a JAVA Process.sleep().

Look at third-party library [Quantum](https://github.com/quantum-elixir-quantum-core).

### Supervising dynamic tasks

In many situations you want to connect to a remote service while still handling
web requests. Using the naive approach of just synchronously handling the remote
connection will result in a bad UX since performance and responsiveness of the
site is extremely coupled with the internet speed. A better approach is to
perform the task asynchronously and then send a notification to the web request
(i.e. Either through web sockets or email to the user) when the task is done.

This is something that you would want to fire on command and have good error
handling for, which clearly aligns with what a Dynamic Supervisor would handle.
Thankfully Elixir already provides an abstraction for this `Task.Supervisor`.

It is important to notice that the life cycles of the logical starter of the
task and the task itself are separated. A crash in one process won't affect the
other.

## Agents

The `Agent` module provides an abstraction similar to a GenServer but without
some of the ceremony. Usually you can replace an GenServer with an Agent if you
only implement init, handle_cast & handle_call.

Unlike a task, an agent process doesn't terminate when the lambda is finished.
Instead, it uses the return value of the function as the new state.

It is worth mentioning that an agent update is synchronous so if you are wanting
to do an asynchronous update you need to use `Agent.cast/2`.




































